Security and certifications

Technically it is relatively easy to create implement networks that are almost impossible to break. With almost impossible I mean, a network that is technically so secure that authorized people network users and suppliers are the only real risk. The people are a risk in two ways, they can be coerced to give access tokens to outsiders, they can use those access tokens for their own personal benefit or vendetta, or they can simply be relaxed about the security. There are ready tools, like TLS, client/server certificates, user accounts, firewalls, and system-level security, which (if used correctly) will provide practically bulletproof protection.

Biggest threat: People make it really easy for a hacker, they collelct all that is needed to log into VPN into one folder (certificate, certificate password, VPN username, and password) so that they get it working on other computers or when it breaks. They put post-it note to their monitor to remember what is the password this month and so on...

Threat created by either malicious or careless people can be addressed by educating the workforce and contractually enforcing responsibility to people who are authenticated to use it. The risk grows with the number of authenticated people (company size): In 10 person business, a malicious or careless person is certain to be caught and jailed. An organization having thousand of authenticated users who have the opportunity and knowledge to steal authentication of their fellow employees, not so.

The term security is used as a marketing gimmick. For example, expensive ISA SDLA doesn't so much define so much technology than the certified organization (to make sure that only a large corporation can be certified). ISA SDLN basically says, a give us a pile of money and fill out a lot of forms. Big automation suppliers do this because for them it is an inexpensive way to blackmouth the competition. It really doesn't do anything for the actual security, and losers are smaller businesses with do not have time and money to play around, and customers who pay for the fun. But life is not fair, assuming otherwise will only lead to disappointment. This is only one way of marketing and competition, and not even specifically evil one.

There are also good publications worth following. RFC2196 is probably the best I have come across, and that is what we try to follow. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2196
